<style>
.promo li a {
    float: left;
    width: 130px;
    height: 20px;
    text-align: center;
    margin: 10px 30px;
    padding: 150px 0 0 0;
    background-position: 0 50%;
    background-size: 130px auto;
    background-repeat: no-repeat;
    font-size: 120%;
    color: black;
}
.promo li {
    list-style: none;
}
</style>

# Django REST framework 3.17

At the Internet, on October 31th, 2025, we are happy to announce the release of Django REST framework 3.17.

## Move to Django-Commons

The project development has moved from [@encode](https://github.com/encode) to the [@django-commons](https://github.com/django-commons) organization on GitHub. The maintenance team being the project remains mostly unchanged since the last release but Kim stepped down from the team and is no longer involved. We're grateful for all the work Kim put into the project over the years.

With Kim stepping down, it felt like the project needed a new home and it felt like Django commons was the right place for it. The organization is set up around an admin team that 

## Updated Python support

The latest release now fully supports Python 3.14, and Python 3.9 support was dropped. Please refer to Django support page to know which Django versions support 3.14.

The current minimum versions of Django remains 4.2.

## Delay CoreAPI deprecation

This was initially planned for 3.17, but we unfortunately didn't find the time to handle this in time so we mad the decision to delay it until 3.18. The exception being raised has been renamed from `RemovedInDRF317Warning` to `RemovedInDRF318Warning` so you may have to update your warnings filters accordingly.

## Migrated packaging to `pyproject.toml`

The packaging of the project has been migrated to `pyproject.toml` to align with modern packaging best practices. We don't expect this to have any impacts since Django itself has already migrated.

## Improved error messages for UniqueConstraint

The validation for [UniqueConstraint](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/models/constraints/#uniqueconstraint) has been improved to support better error messages (via `violation_error_code` and `violation_error_message`)

## Other fixes and improvements

There are a few fixes and minor improvements in this release, ranging from documentation, internal infrastructure (typing, testing, requirements, deprecation, etc.), security and overall behavior.

See the [release notes](release-notes.md) page for a complete listing.
